# Caltech

A2A. What is the most challenging computer science course at Caltech?

First, Caltech has some of the finest students in the world, so what we (mortals) may find challenging, they may not. What I can tell is that some Berkeley, Harvard, MIT, and Stanford students have found the following courses challenging:

CS 38. Algorithms. 9 units (3-0-6); third term. Prerequisites: CS 2; Ma/CS 6 a or Ma 121 a; and CS 21 or CS/EE/Ma 129 a. This course introduces techniques for the design and analysis of efficient algorithms. Major design techniques (the greedy approach, divide and conquer, dynamic programming, linear programming) will be introduced through a variety of algebraic, graph, and optimization problems. Methods for identifying intractability (via NP-completeness) will be discussed.

Ma/CS 117 abc. Computability Theory. 9 units (3-0-6); first, second, third terms. Prerequisite: Ma 5 or equivalent, or instructor’s permission. Various approaches to computability theory, e.g., Turing machines, recursive functions, Markov algorithms; proof of their equivalence. Church’s thesis. Theory of computable functions and effectively enumerable sets. Decision problems. Undecidable problems: word problems for groups, solvability of Diophantine equations (Hilbert’s 10th problem). Relations with mathematical logic and the Gödel incompleteness theorems. Decidable problems, from number theory, algebra, combinatorics, and logic. Complexity of decision procedures. Inherently complex problems of exponential and superexponential difficulty. Feasible (polynomial time) computations. Polynomial deterministic vs. nondeterministic algorithms, NP-complete problems and the P = NP question.

CMS/CS/IDS 139. Analysis and Design of Algorithms. 12 units (3-0-9); second term. Prerequisites: Ma 2, Ma 3, Ma/CS 6a, CS 21, CS 38/138, and CMS/ACM/EE 116 or ACM/CMS 113 or equivalent. This course develops core principles for the analysis and design of algorithms. Basic material includes mathematical techniques for analyzing performance in terms of resources, such as time, space, and randomness. The course introduces the major paradigms for algorithm design, including greedy methods, divide-and-conquer, dynamic programming, linear and semidefinite programming, randomized algorithms, and online learning.

CS/SS/Ec 149. Algorithmic Economics. 9 units (3-0-6); second term. This course will equip students to engage with active research at the intersection of social and information sciences, including: algorithmic game theory and mechanism design; auctions; matching markets; and learning in games.

CS/IDS 150. Probability and Algorithms. 9 units (3-0-6); second term. Prerequisites: CS 38 a and Ma 5 abc. Elementary randomized algorithms and algebraic bounds in communication, hashing, and identity testing. Game tree evaluation. Topics may include randomized parallel computation; independence, k-wise independence and derandomization; rapidly mixing Markov chains; expander graphs and their applications; clustering algorithms.

CS 151. Complexity Theory. 12 units (3-0-9); third term. Prerequisites: CS 21 and CS 38, or instructor’s permission. This course describes a diverse array of complexity classes that are used to classify problems according to the computational resources (such as time, space, randomness, or parallelism) required for their solution. The course examines problems whose fundamental nature is exposed by this framework, the known relationships between complexity classes, and the numerous open problems in the area.

CMS/CS/CNS/EE/IDS 155. Machine Learning & Data Mining. 12 units (3-3-6); second term. Prerequisites: CS 156a. Having a sufficient background in algorithms, linear algebra, calculus, probability, and statistics, is highly recommended. This course will cover popular methods in machine learning and data mining, with an emphasis on developing a working understanding of how to apply these methods in practice. The course will focus on basic foundational concepts underpinning and motivating modern machine learning and data mining approaches. We will also discuss recent research developments.

Ph/CS 219 abc. Quantum Computation. 9 units (3-0-6); first, second, third terms. Prerequisite: Ph 129 abc or equivalent. The theory of quantum information and quantum computation. Overview of classical information theory, compression of quantum information, transmission of quantum information through noisy channels, quantum error-correcting codes, quantum cryptography and teleportation. Overview of classical complexity theory, quantum complexity, efficient quantum algorithms, fault-tolerant quantum computation, physical implementations of quantum computation.

I should point out the Topics courses that discuss the latest research and open problems are extremely challenging because there are no books and research papers. In many cases, they discuss preliminary findings.

## 

CS 151 (Complexity Theory): Taught by Professor Chris Umans ([Chris Umans Home Page](http://users.cms.caltech.edu/~umans/)), this class is kind of a continuation of his CS21 (Decidability and Tractability). This class covers roughly one "resource" per week (such as randomness, nondeterminism, nonuniformity, advice, interaction, and counting etc.) It's probably the hardest CS class in the entire school (I would sit down to work on the set Tuesday afternoon, spend most of the day thinking and working with a friend ([Martin Michelsen](https://www.quora.com/profile/Martin-Michelsen)), go to office hours on Wednesday afternoon to ask about the couple of problems I'd have left, and spend Wednesday night writing up the sets -- there would easily be 15-20 hours put into each weekly set) but it was also probably the most interesting. Also you feel like a real badass when you're using knowledge from the class to prove parts of papers from six months ago (I believe it's in this paper http://www.stanford.edu/~rrwill/acc-lbs.pdf that he proved that  NEXP⊈ACC . We proved on a set that  ENP⊈ACC .)
Course website: [CS 151](http://users.cms.caltech.edu/~umans/cs151/)

ME/CS 132 (Advanced Robotics: Navigation and Vision): Taught by instructors from the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL). Over the course of the term, the class covers: basic optics, feature detection and matching (the homework has the students implement Harris corner detectors and then simple sum of squared difference matching, but they later use SIFT features), the eight point algorithm, some gradient descent stuff, probabilistic inference (including Bayesian belief propagation), Kalman Filters, and particle filters. Labs involve using Pioneer robots equipped with a laser scanner and implementing many of the concepts we learned, such as using the probabilistic methods to map the lab from laser scanner data. This class was probably the one in which I felt most badass: the instructors did a very good job of choosing assignments that have good visualizations (watching your particle filter work for the first time is so much fun), and having your code work correctly on the robots is great. Taking this class is actually what convinced me that I want to do the AI side of autonomous vehicles research in the future when I get the opportunity.
Course website: [ME/CS 132a, Winter 2013](https://www.cds.caltech.edu/~murray/wiki/index.php/ME/CS_132a,_Winter_2013)